GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill. Judy Woodruff is
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: The threat from
terrorism is real, but we
will overcome it. We will
destroy ISIL and any other
organization that tries to harm
us.
GWEN IFILL: President Obama's
effort to reassure a nation
worried about terrorism. We get
reaction
to his prime-time
Oval Office address.
Also ahead: Chicago police under
investigation for civil rights
violations, as dash-cam video
is released of another
officer-involved shooting.
And it's Politics Monday. The
2016 candidates weigh in on
terrorism and the president.
Plus: Beijing issues its first
red alert for smog -- how one
group is trying to clear the
air.
LINDA GREER, Natural Resources
Defense Council: China's
pollution problem is caused by
about
one-third by export to America
and to Western Europe. So this
pollution is our pollution,
and I think we have an ethical
obligation to help reduce it.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Americans today
weighed the president's Sunday
night address on terror abroad
and
at home.
At the same time, investigators
in Southern California sought to
shed new light on the
attack by a husband and wife
who turned to militant Islam.
San Bernardino County leaders
called for unity this morning,
as thousands of employees
returned
to work for the first time
since last week's shootings.
TRUDY RAYMUNDO, Public Health
Director, San Bernardino County:
Today, I want to ask the
community to mourn with us. I
ask that you come together and
hold each other strong,
because it is this strength
that will help us heal.
GWEN IFILL: Public Health
Director Trudy Raymundo was at
the holiday lunch where Syed
Farook
and his wife, Tashfeen Malik,
opened fire, killing 14 people
and wounding 21.
A focus of the probe now is
whether Malik radicalized her
husband and if she was, indeed,
the driving force behind the
rampage. The FBI's David Bowdich
said today the couple
trained by taking target
practice, but it's not clear who
led the way to violence.
DAVID BOWDICH, FBI Assistant
Director: We have learned and
believe that both subjects
were radicalized and have
been for quite some time.
Now, how did that happen? The
question we're trying to get at
is, how did that happen and
by whom and where
did that happen?
GWEN IFILL: As the attack began
last week, Malik pledged
allegiance online to Abu Bakr
al-Baghdadi, overall leader of
the Islamic State group. The
militants say she was a
supporter,
but have not claimed any
direct link to the attack.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: The threat from
terrorism is real, but we
will overcome it.
GWEN IFILL: Last night,
President Obama sought to
reassure the nation.
BARACK OBAMA: Our success won't
depend on tough talk or
abandoning our values or giving
into fear. That's what groups
like ISIL are hoping for.
Instead, we will prevail by
being
strong and smart,
resilient and relentless.
GWEN IFILL: The president did
not announce a new strategy to
defeat the Islamic State,
but he did call for greater gun
control measures. They would
include not allowing people
whose
names appear on no-fly
lists to buy firearms.
In San Bernardino, reactions at
a makeshift memorial were
lukewarm.
MAN: He has to walk a fine line,
but it probably comes across as
a little weak, but that is
kind of Obama's style.
WOMAN: It wasn't strong enough.
It appears to me, every time
that he talks on camera,
that this is like a bothersome
thing for him, that he really
just does not want to have
to deal with this.
GWEN IFILL: Back in Washington,
the homeland security secretary,
Jeh Johnson, said today
he will announce changes to the
national terror alert system in
the coming days.
In related developments, the
Pentagon now confirms that an
airstrike last month killed
the Islamic State's top leader
in Libya, and a strike last week
in Somalia killed a senior
member of the militant group
Al-Shabaab, affiliated with
al-Qaida.
The day's other major story
comes out of Chicago, where the
police will now come under a
full-scale
federal investigation. The
Justice Department plans to
review officers' use of force
and
other issues. We will report on
this in detail later in the
program.
In the day's other news,
negotiators on a global climate
deal moved into a critical
phase in Paris. This is the
second and final week of the
U.N. conference.
U.N. Secretary-General Ban
Ki-Moon warned ministers from
nearly 200 countries not to
duck hard decisions.
BAN KI-MOON, United Nations
Secretary-General (through
translator): The clock is
ticking
towards climate catastrophe. The
world is expecting more from you
than half-measures
and incremental approaches. It
is calling for a transformative
agreement, an agreement
that opens the way for peace,
stability and prosperity.
GWEN IFILL: Negotiators released
a draft agreement over the
weekend, which left all of the
critical
disputes unresolved.
Democratic presidential
candidate Bernie Sanders
outlined his own climate
strategy today aimed
at what he calls the billionaire
fossil fuel lobby. The Vermont
senator's plan aims to
cut U.S. carbon pollution 40
percent from 1990 levels by the
year 2030. Sanders says
he would ban Arctic and offshore
drilling, and he's calling for
an end to subsidies for
fossil fuel companies.
In Venezuela, they're still
counting the votes from Sunday's
stunning parliamentary election.
But it's already clear the
results will challenge years of
Socialist domination in the
Latin
America oil state.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret Warner
has this report.
MARGARET WARNER: It was a
raucous scene throughout the
night in the streets of Caracas,
filled
with victory chants, car horns
honking, and people hugging,
after the opposition coalition
took control of the national
assembly with 62 percent of
yesterday's vote. A top
coalition
official hailed the results,
even as the counting continued.
The morning newspapers confirmed
it: Opposition candidates won 99
seats to the ruling Socialist
Party's 46, with 22 races
still outstanding.
Socialist President Nicolas
Maduro conceded the loss, but
blamed an economic war waged
by foreign elements and a bid
for power by the conservative
moneyed clash.
Maduro came to power in 2013,
succeeding the charismatic
revolutionary Hugo Chavez, who
ruled for 14 years. But with
falling oil prices, the economy
of this oil-rich country has
tanked,
with 180 percent inflation this
year and near-empty store
shelves.
Michael Shifter is president of
the Inter-American Dialogue in
Washington.
MICHAEL SHIFTER, Inter-American
Dialogue: The economic situation
in Venezuela is horrible.
It's hard to think of another
precedent that's as bad as
Venezuela's. The inflation rate
is the highest in the world.
There are shortages. People are
waiting for three hours to get
toilet paper. It just became
absolutely unacceptable, and so
the performance of the
government,
I think, was on the line, and
the voters -- the voters had
their say.
MARGARET WARNER: The opposition
also demanded its jailed leaders
and supporters be freed,
like local Mayor Leopoldo Lopez,
serving 14 years for promoting
political violence. His
wife spoke last night.
LILIAN TINTORI, Wife of Leopoldo
Lopez (through translator):
Thank you for your vote. Thank
you for fighting. Thank you for
resisting, which can get tiring.
We didn't get tired.
We did it.
MARGARET WARNER: This evening,
as Venezuelans waited for the
official final tally, the
opposition
announced it captured the
two-thirds supermajority needs
to curb Maduro's near-absolute
power.
But, in Washington, the White
House said it's too soon to tell
if the outcome in Venezuela
will alter years of antagonism
toward the United States.
France's far-right National
Front Party has scored its best
election showing ever in the
wake of the terror attacks in
Paris. Supporters celebrated
last night as the
anti-immigration
party won in six of 13 regions
in Sunday's first round of
voting. The second round is
next Sunday.
The price of oil plunged today
to its lowest since early 2009.
It closed at $37.65 a barrel
in New York, down nearly 6
percent. That, in turn, drove
down energy stocks and the
broader market. The Dow Jones
industrial average lost 117
points to finish at 17730. The
Nasdaq
fell 40 points. And
the S&P 500 shed 14.
And this day marked 74 years
since Japan attacked Pearl
Harbor, plunging the United
States into
World War II. In Hawaii, a
presentation of memorial wreaths
highlighted ceremonies
overlooking
the USS Arizona memorial. The
event also paid tribute to
elderly survivors of the attack.
In only his third Oval Office
address ever, President Obama
set out last night to reassure
Americans that he has a plan to
fight ISIS abroad and protect
Americans from terrorism
at home, but is the
administration's response the
right one for the times?
We ask those questions now or
Michael Mukasey, who served as
President George W. Bush's
attorney
general, and Juliette Kayyem, a
former assistant secretary in
the Department of Homeland
Security
during the Obama administration.
She's now at Harvard's Kennedy
School of Government.
Michael Mukasey, did he
accomplish what he needed to
last night?
MICHAEL MUKASEY, Former U.S.
Attorney General: Not as far as
I saw.
I think if the goal was to
provide reassurance to the
American people that he's got a
plan,
I don't see a plan. I see more
of the same, which has not
succeeded. There are plans out
there. He didn't talk about any
of them. There is legislation
pending that would allow an
enhancement and a safeguarding
of our intelligence-gathering
capability. He didn't talk about
that.
There are plans to position U.S.
troops, not large numbers, but
U.S. troops, so as to attack
ISIS where it lives. There are
plans to deal with the
possibility of a safety zone in
Syria,
so as to stop the exit of
refugees. He didn't talk about
that either.
It was a lot more of the same
and a lot of caution to the
American people about not
discriminating,
about not holding all Muslims
responsible, which is a -- he
cut a bloody swathe through
a lot of straw men, but didn't
talk about much that was new.
GWEN IFILL: Juliette Kayyem,
what do you think? Did the
president take advantage of
everything
he has at his disposal?
JULIETTE KAYYEM, Former
Department of Homeland Security
Assistant Secretary: In some
ways,
yes.
litany. And he did actually
discuss changes to the visa
waiver program, for example. I
actually appreciated the
statements he made, very similar
to George Bush after 9/11, about
the Muslim community being a
part of the American fabric and
that integration of immigrant
communities
into this country
actually makes us safer.
Where I thought he failed or
could have been done more was in
twofold. One was, it was
a lot about what the government
is doing for us, and less about
what people might be able
to do for ourselves. And, in
that way, it didn't sort of
engage people in ways that
those of us in homeland security
are hoping the government
engages, communities, whether
it's see something, say
something, or even things like
even active shooter training.
These are -- people want to be
empowered with what to do in
this time of unease. And I think
the other issue, which is just
sort of I think a philosophical
issue, which is sort of, what's
the measure of success?
No expert, no presidential
candidate can sort of reasonably
argue that there will ever be
another attack. And so in light
of the fact there might be more
attacks, just given the
kind of threat we're facing, how
quick it is for people to become
radicalized, the access
to guns, I think he might have
prepared us that there will be
more attacks, and begin
to get us as resilient as we
need to be for the kind of
threat we have.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let me ask
Mr. Mukasey about that.
Did he do enough to at once the
reassure Americans and to also
prepare them? It seems like a
tightrope that you have to walk
as president, prepare them for
the possibility of more mayhem.
MICHAEL MUKASEY: I
don't think so.
I think, if anything, the
message was see something, do
nothing. The people in
California
who did see something were
reluctant to disclose it,
reluctant to report it to the
authorities
because of possible reaction by
their neighbors and possibly
being accused of profiling.
Look, this is December 7. It's
the anniversary of the attack on
Pearl Harbor. If FDR had
gone before Congress and
delivered the kind of speech
that President Obama delivered
last
night and told the American
people that the folks who
attacked us at Pearl Harbor were
not representative of the
peaceful Shinto religion and
that we must be very careful
not to discriminate, and that we
have to be prepared for more,
and had said that he wasn't
going to send a lot of troops to
occupy foreign lands, what do
you think the reaction would
have been?
I think he would have been
booted off the podium.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Well, let me to you
about that, because you worked
for George W. Bush, who
after the 9/11 attacks very
famously appeared with members
of the Muslim community and
said,
this is not about Islam.
Is there something else that
they should be doing? You talked
about racial profiling.
What is this administration
encouraging or not encouraging
that you find is lacking on
that front?
MICHAEL MUKASEY: What I think is
lacking on that front is
encouraging people to actually
consider the fact that this is a
religiously-based doctrine that
we're facing, without at all
condemning all Muslims or even
the majority of Muslims at all.
It's a fine line to walk, but it
has to be walked. And I think
that the fact that the
violence in this country that
emanated from this source
started in the 1980s, it
continued
in the 1990s, with the attacks
on our embassies in Kenya and
Tanzania, attacks on the Cole,
attacks in -- overseas, then the
first Trade Center bombing, the
second Trade Center -- the
second attack on 9/11, this is
all coming -- this all has the
same DNA, and talking
about that is important.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Pardon
me for interrupting.
Juliette Kayyem, I want you to
respond to that and also to this
idea that technology
somehow has outpaced our
learning curve when it comes to
attacks like this.
JULIETTE KAYYEM: Well, I think,
as respects to Muslim American
communities, I did hear
the president actually mention
that this is a fight within
Islam, and that in fact it
is the religion itself and
members of the religion who are
going to have to combat the
struggle that makes violence a
part of these radical terrorists
who are attacking us.
So, that, he clearly said. And
that was further than he had
said before. But anyone who's
been in counterterrorism, like
the two of us, knows, sort of
looking at the American
fabric, if you ask me, what is
the thing that makes us safe, as
compared to sort of France
and the systemic issues that
they're having, or Britain,
even, with the problems that
they
have with immigrant communities,
it is America's capacity to
integrate and even assimilate
all these different populations.
We're not perfect. We certainly
have a problem in this country.
No one's denying that. But
it was very important, in the
context of the presidential
campaign and Obama's critics
and some things that they have
said regarding, you know,
tracing Muslims and targeting
Muslims
and Muslims won't be president
-- I know that's the extreme,
but it is out there -- to say
forcefully that is not how we
either conduct ourselves as a
democratic society, nor is
it actually going
to make us safer.
But just getting to the point
about sort of moving forward, it
can't -- as I said, you
know, we will face violence in
this country, given the threat.
It's not just technology.
It is that no amount of
intelligence can seem to be able
to at any time in our history
figure
out what is that moment when
someone goes from not liking
America or not liking their
position in life to violence?
Is it access to arms? Is it
radicalization? Is it that ISIS
is very good online? It's
all of those things, possibly.
But no intelligence agencies,
not us, not the Israelis, no
one,
can get to the moment
that stops every attack.
So, our measure of success has
to be limiting the number of
attacks, and then having a
public
safety public response apparatus
that can minimize the deaths
when those attacks occurred.
So, if you look at San
Bernardino, more people would
have died but for the actions of
very
quick response by police
officers and public safety
officials, same with the Boston
Marathon,
same with that happened this
weekend in Britain with the
knife -- the stabbings in the
subway.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
Juliette Kayyem of the Harvard
Kennedy School now, and Michael
Mukasey former U.S. attorney
general, thank you
both very much.
JULIETTE KAYYEM: Thank you.
MICHAEL MUKASEY: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Chicago's police
department and the role of the
city's leaders were back in
the spotlight today, as
questions mounted about
accountability, police history
and what
happened in another
fatal shooting.
The day started with the Justice
Department's announcement that
it will investigate the
city's police force.
William Brangham has the story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The official
word came from Attorney General
Loretta Lynch in Washington:
The Justice Department will
investigate what it calls --
quote -- "patterns and
practices"
by the Chicago police.
LORETTA LYNCH, U.S. Attorney
General: What we will be looking
at, again, is the Chicago
Police Department's method and
manner of dealing with use of
force, particularly deadly
force,
and whether or not we find
racial, ethnic and other
disparities in how they handle
those
force allegations. It will
encompass a number of things,
including how officers are
disciplined
and the disciplinary systems.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Chicago Mayor
Rahm Emanuel initially opposed a
federal civil rights
investigation
as -- quote -- "misguided," but,
today, he says he welcomed it.
RAHM EMANUEL (D), Mayor of
Chicago: We're going to
cooperate with the Department of
Justice as it relates to the
police department. And you
should hear from me it's in our
self-interest
as a city for them to be here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The federal
probe follows a furor over the
killing of 17-year-old Laquan
McDonald. Last month, the city
released police video of the
incident, more than a year after
it occurred. On it, officer
Jason Van Dyke is seen shooting
McDonald 16 times. Police
say McDonald had a knife, but,
on the video, he appears to be
moving away from the officers.
Van Dyke is now charged with
first-degree murder. But there
will be no charges in another
fatal police shooting from 2014,
this one just eight days before
the McDonald shooting.
Video released today shows
officer George Hernandez
shooting at a fleeing
25-year-old
named Ronald Johnson.
Police say Johnson had pointed a
gun, which they say was found
next to his body when he
fell.
State's attorney Anita Alvarez
found insufficient evidence to
take action against the officer.
ANITA ALVAREZ, Cook County
State's Attorney: Even though
Mr. Johnson was running away
from
Hernandez and other officers, he
was running towards a police
vehicle containing two other
responding officers and unknown
members of the public inside
that park.
Furthermore, Johnson could have
easily turned around and quickly
fired at the officers pursuing
him or even fired as he ran.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The lawyer for
Johnson's family denied he had a
gun and called the
prosecutor's reasoning
-- quote -- "a joke."
MICHAEL OPPENHEIMER, Johnson
Family Attorney: When they all
saw the video, they all said,
oh, he was about to turn and
point, because they had to
justify what Hernandez did. And
there simply is
no justification.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For his part,
Mayor Emanuel has already fired
the police superintendent,
and he promised full
accountability again today.
RAHM EMANUEL: I'm taking
responsibility for what
happened, and I take
responsibility for
fixing it in this action, and
part of every level of
government and service is
thinking
not only about the future of the
city of Chicago, doing the
things necessary, and making
sure
that you're held accountable
for the results.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Protesters, in
turn, say they won't stop their
demonstrations, demanding
both the mayor and the
prosecutor step down.
Let's look a little deeper into
the federal investigation of
Chicago's police department
and prior work by the Department
of Justice in the same vein.
Vanita Gupta is the assistant
attorney general at the
Department of Justice. She heads
the
Civil Rights Division and
has led these efforts.
Welcome.
Can we talk a little bit about
the timing of this? Was this
particular case, the killing
of Laquan McDonald, was that the
impetus for the Justice
Department stepping in today?
VANITA GUPTA, Assistant U.S.
Attorney General: The impetus is
that we conduct a preliminary
review that looks at all of the
available evidence, including,
of course, the Laquan
McDonald incident and response,
and we decide whether these --
we think that there is enough
of a reason for the Justice
Department to open a pattern and
practice investigation.
So we consider a bunch of
available information.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I mean,
there's a lot of people in
Chicago who, as you know, have
been
complaining about police and
community relations for years in
that city. And many of them are
saying, why did it
take you so long?
VANITA GUPTA: Well, you know,
the Justice Department gets
asked to be in a lot of
different
jurisdictions.
And we -- again, we look at all
of the available information.
There were obviously many more
requests made in the last weeks
since the release of that video.
We took those very
seriously, and examined what was
available, and decided this was
the time to open up this
investigation.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, about the
investigation, what are you
going to be looking into
specifically?
VANITA GUPTA: So, we're going to
be looking at use of force and
accountability issues.
And I will say, these are two
very deep, broad areas for a
very large department, for the
Justice Department to be
investigating. We will be
looking at the ways in which
officers
have used force, are trained to
use force, the ways of -- that
they are reporting and
being held accountable for
incidents where there may be
excessive use of force.
So, we will be looking at a
broad range of issues that fall
into those two areas.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And with
regards to the McDonald case in
particular, there's a lot
of people in Chicago who believe
that there was a cover-up, that
not just the police department,
but that all the way up to city
hall, there was an attempt to
suppress the evidence about
this particular killing.
Can the Justice Department
investigate that as well? Will
you investigate that?
VANITA GUPTA: So, that is a
separate criminal matter.
And, obviously, the criminal
investigators will be looking at
all the available evidence
pertaining to that particular
matter. But the work that -- the
investigation that we
announced today is a civil
pattern and practice
investigation. And that is
really aimed at
looking at whether there is a
pattern and practice of
constitutional violations being
committed by the Chicago Police
Department in the areas of use
of force and accountability.
We will, obviously, consider a
particular individual incident
as we look at whether
there's a pattern or practice,
but this is separate from
criminal investigations.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, let's say
you do find a pattern or a
practice. What happens then?
How do you try to
stamp that out?
VANITA GUPTA: Yes, so after --
if we do find that upon kind of
a thorough review, we will
then issue our findings
publicly. It's something that we
think is important for the
American
public to be -- to understand
and be aware of kind of what we
have looked at and what
we found.
And then we would seek to
negotiate through a
collaborative negotiation an
agreement with
the city to remedy the problems
that we found. And in the vast
majority of jurisdictions
where the Justice Department
goes in, we are able to achieve
a negotiated settlement that
then will be court-enforceable
with a monitor, and that seeks
to remedy all the constitutional
violations that we found.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Our colleagues
at "Frontline" and The
Washington Post did an
investigation,
or really an examination, of a
lot of prior instances where the
Justice Department tried
to fix problems within police
departments around the country,
and the results were mixed.
They found examples of use of
force going up in some
departments after the
settlements.
Morale plummeted in others.
Community relations in many were
still deeply troubled.
Why do you think Chicago
will be different?
VANITA GUPTA: So, just for
something that I think is
important to understand about
our
investigations, is, when we
actually achieve an agreement to
remedy these problems, we
will often, in those
jurisdictions, see spikes in
reporting because there actually
is data
collection, there's tracking.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Because people
are just paying more attention.
VANITA GUPTA: They're paying
more attention. They have more
confidence in the actual systems
that we have put in place.
And so that is actually quite
typical of our investigations.
We have also been recently
in places like East Haven,
Connecticut, and Seattle,
Washington, where they have
really
transformed the way that they
are engaged in using force, when
they are using force,
what kind of accountability
systems they have in place.
And it is resulting in very
significant reductions in the
uses of force, while keeping
crime
and violent crime down. And I
think that that's really
important. In places like East
Haven,
we have been able to document
transformed relationships
between the community and law
enforcement.
And so these are -- you know,
look, policing is a very complex
-- it's a set of complex
issues. And I think that we have
been working very
collaboratively along the
process with
law enforcement, with community,
listening to them directly about
what they're experiencing
every day in order to come out
with the best kind of police
department that the community
deserves in these jurisdictions.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The head of
the FBI, James Comey, has said
that all of these criticisms
of police, all of these
investigations may in some way
be causing police to step back
and not doing their
job as effectively.
Do you think that that's true?
And, if so, do you worry that
yet another investigation
could suppress the work that
police are trying to do, because
they're scared?
VANITA GUPTA: Well, so Director
Comey actually said that Justice
Department scrutiny is critical
to the field of policing.
But what he did say -- and
there's obviously a robust
discussion right now about these
issues around whether there is
de-policing or not. And I think
the reality is, there
is no data to back up the
assertions. We know that law
enforcement every day, police
officers
every day are continuing to do
what they do every day, which is
to put themselves in danger
to protect the rest of us.
And, obviously, though, we are
interested in accumulating and
collecting data. But,
for now, there is nothing to
contradict what police officers,
what we're hearing police
officers say around the country.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The attorney
general in her announcement
today said she hoped that
this investigation would also
serve as a deterrent to other
police forces.
Is there any evidence that
that actually happens?
VANITA GUPTA: Well, I have spent
a lot of the last year speaking
directly with law enforcement,
with police agencies
and the like.
And what they are doing right
now is, I think, quite laudable.
They're looking at our consent
decrees. They're examining the
president's report on 21st
century policing. They are
trying to take proactive steps
to ensure that, if there is a
critical incident, that it
doesn't
create mass civil unrest and
that they are preempting,
through training, through
policies,
through changes that they are
voluntarily undertaking, so that
they can have constitutional
policing, while keeping the
public safe and, frankly, not
have a pattern and practice
investigation
if that can be held off.
And so I actually think there is
a very robust conversation
happening right now around the
country among law enforcement on
a whole range of these issues.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
acting Assistant Attorney
General Vanita Gupta, thank you
very
much.
VANITA GUPTA: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Beijing issues a red alert, as a
layer of smog bears down
on the Chinese capital; plus,
how an annual art fair inspires
Miami's local culture.
But, first, we return to the
fallout from last week's San
Bernardino attacks.
Candidates have staked out
ground, some of it high, some of
it low. Today, front-runner
Donald Trump said that the U.S.
should shut down all travel by
Muslims to the U.S., including
tourists. Other candidates
blasted the president for what
they said was a tepid response.
Even Democratic front-runner
Hillary Clinton said more needs
to happen.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: We're
not winning, but it's too soon
to say
that we are doing everything we
need to do. And I have outlined
very clearly. We have
to fight them in the air. We
have to fight them on the
ground, and we have to fight
them
on the Internet.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate: We don't
need a president who goes on
national
television and lectures the
American people like a
schoolmarm, that condescends to
the
American people and says the
problem we have is Islamophobia.
No, the problem we have is
a president and commander in
chief who refuses to recognize
our enemy. Our enemy is radical
Islamic terrorism.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate: And
people are scared not just
because of
these attacks, but because of a
growing sense that we have a
president that is completely
overwhelmed by them.
I'm very disappointed tonight. I
think not only did the president
not make things better
tonight. I fear he may have made
things worse in the minds of
many Americans.
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM (R-SC),
Presidential Candidate: The
president is misleading us about
the 65-nation
coalition. It's only on paper.
There is no answer, other than
destroying ISIL. The president
has got the right goal. He just
doesn't have the right strategy.
GWEN IFILL: It's
Politics Monday.
So, for more on the response to
the president's address, we turn
to Tamara Keith of NPR and
Amy Walter, pardon me, of
The Cook Political Report.
We have to start, ladies, by
talking about Donald Trump, who,
this afternoon, put out
this statement saying that all
Muslims should be banned from
the United States, shouldn't
cross borders, including
American-born Muslims who happen
to be abroad.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Where do we even begin?
GWEN IFILL: Where to begin.
AMY WALTER: We just -- for a guy
who continues to raise the bar
on saying and doing really
inappropriate and offensive
things, he now raised it that
much higher. And you're starting
to see even Republican
candidates jumping on him and
saying this is absolutely
outrageous
and this is not at all
what we should be doing.
But Donald Trump has, thus far,
been rewarded for everything
he's said and done. Not only
does his support not go away,
but it hardens around him, with
the sense that he is the
only person that's saying the
things that everybody else
believes, but won't dare to
say.
GWEN IFILL: As we speak, there
have been denunciations from Jeb
Bush, who called him unhinged,
from
Lindsey Graham, from other
Republican candidates. Ted Cruz
has said, "That's not my
position."
That's all he said.
Even Hillary Clinton weighed in.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: She did. She tweeted and
said that this doesn't make
us safer. And she even added,
Donald Trump, the real Donald
Trump. She tweeted it herself,
the H. was there.
I think that the backlash is
immediate and has come from all
ranges of candidates on
the Republican side and on the
Democratic side. This is not one
of those things where
they're just sort of backing
away and saying Trump will be
Trump. Pretty much of all the
candidates have weighed in and
said this is not the right thing
to be saying.
That said, Donald Trump is
getting the ratings he wants.
People are talking about him.
GWEN IFILL: Here we are.
(CROSSTALK)
TAMARA KEITH: He is driving
a news cycle once again.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let's go back
to the previous news cycle then,
rather than helping him to
do that, and talk about the
president's speech last night.
The interesting thing is that
there was unanimity on the part
of all these Republicans, the
ones who spoke, and some of the
Democrats, that the president
didn't quite do enough
last night.
AMY WALTER: Right.
I mean, here's what Republicans
wanted. They wanted two things.
They wanted the president
to say that we're at war with
radical Islam and they wanted to
hear him say we have a
different strategy. And they
didn't get either one of those
things. And they got a lecture
on gun control from the
president, which they also hate.
So, it was pretty easy for them
to say that they disagreed with
it. What wasn't easy was
to see just where Republicans go
next. Each of them has sort of
different avenue in terms
of what they'd do to
handle ISIS and terrorism.
GWEN IFILL: So, if you're Ted
Cruz, you want the president and
several of the others to
say the words radical Islamic
terrorism, those words, no other
way of putting it. And if
you're Marco Rubio, you want to
say the president's weak. That
seems to be the theme that we
see
emerging.
TAMARA KEITH: I think that's a
pretty consistent theme that has
been coming from Republican
presidential candidates,
Republicans on Capitol Hill,
that President Obama is not
using strong
enough language and that he
doesn't have a strategy.
However, many of these same
candidates, when you look at
their strategies, their strategy
seems to be very similar to
President Obama's strategy,
except, like, we would do it
better.
AMY WALTER: But a little bit
tougher, but a little more.
TAMARA KEITH: But tougher
or stronger language.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
TAMARA KEITH: But not a markedly
different strategy, aside from
Lindsey Graham, who talks
about something like 10,000
ground troops. Many of them are
saying the same things.
They want airstrikes,
but more of them.
GWEN IFILL: But they have turned
this into a critique of the
president than a critique
-- rather than a critique
of the president.
AMY WALTER: Correct, more of the
style, including Hillary
Clinton.
GWEN IFILL: Including
Hillary Clinton.
AMY WALTER: That's right.
And she went on television
Sunday morning saying that she
had hoped that the president
was going to outline sort of a
more muscular defense of his
strategy or give some new
proposals,
which he didn't do. Notably, she
hasn't made any statements in
the wake of his speech last
night.
GWEN IFILL: But was very quick
to make a statement about Donald
Trump.
AMY WALTER: Statement
about Donald Trump.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, but that's
easier. That's certainly easier
for her.
She's in a difficult position,
where she was part of the Obama
administration, she was
part of the early development of
the strategy. And now she is
distancing herself, but you
can't distance yourself too far.
And it's just tougher for her.
GWEN IFILL: If you are going to
pick a fight, pick the easier
fight.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes. And going
after Donald Trump, for Hillary
Clinton, that is an easy
fight.
GWEN IFILL: Well, here's the
other fight which seems to be
percolating to top on the
Republican
side, and that's Ted Cruz and
Marco Rubio, who kind of are
eying each other from opposite
ends of the boxing ring.
AMY WALTER: Right.
It's sort of interesting
because, while Donald Trump is
taking up all the time and
energy
right now, I think where many of
us see this race ultimately
coming down to is a choice
between Ted Cruz and Marco
Rubio for the nomination.
If you're Ted Cruz, you're
hoping that Donald Trump
supporters, Carson supporters
ultimately
come to you. If you're Marco
Rubio, you are positioning
yourself a little bit more as
the center-right, as opposed to
more of the right candidate.
And what Marco Rubio is doing
right now is trying to undermine
Cruz's bona fides on defense,
to try to take those supporters
who might migrate from Trump and
Carson over to Cruz.
So, basically, let's try to
question Cruz's commitment on
national security, his support
for getting rid of the metadata
bulk collection system,
questioning some of his support
for
other issues in terms of
making him look weaker.
GWEN IFILL: So, are they
fighting for second place? Is
that what they're doing, hoping
that Trump stumbles and
they get the fallout?
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
These are two senators who are
basically the same age, who have
similar backgrounds, Cuban
Americans. And they...
GWEN IFILL: Similar ambitions.
TAMARA KEITH: And similar
ambitions and are both also very
good orators from the Senate.
And they are looking at each
other and thinking that they are
going to be the final two, that
they figure, at some point, the
air will come out of the Donald
Trump balloon and it will
be between them. And they
are fighting that fight.
GWEN IFILL: The great Ann
Selzer, who is a pollster in
Iowa we -- some of us know, and
who weighed in by saying, the
one thing about all these polls
we follow so obsessively,
who is up and who is down, is
that Iowans make up their minds
the last minute.
AMY WALTER: They always do it
very, very late, and as do New
Hampshire voters, and a lot
of it is determined by what had
happened in the state before
that.
GWEN IFILL: So all right
now is just a dance?
AMY WALTER: A lot of it is a
dance, but a lot of it is sowing
the seeds.
And, again, that's where Marco
Rubio, doing this much more than
Ted Cruz is doing it to
Rubio, but sowing seeds of
doubt, sowing seeds of
questioning his commitment on
some of these
issues when it comes to national
security, hoping that voters
remember that as they make
their last-minute decisions.
GWEN IFILL: Final thought.
TAMARA KEITH: There are three or
four tickets out of Iowa, and
Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio
are hoping to have
those tickets.
AMY WALTER: Yes, and Ted Cruz
more likely to have that ticket
than Marco Rubio.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, absolutely.
GWEN IFILL: You guys got right
to the ticket thing right away.
I thought we were going
to do that later. We will
get back to it again.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Thank
you both very much.
For the first time in six years,
Congress has passed, and the
president has signed,
a $300 billion transportation
funding law. Political director
Lisa Desjardins reports
on the bipartisan breakthrough.
You can find her report online
on what happens when politics
goes right.
As thick smog bore down on
China's capital today, Beijing
issued its first-ever red alert.
The country's highest possible
warning prompted citywide school
closings and driving
restrictions.
The scenes are a stark reminder
of the huge environmental price
China has paid for becoming
the world's factory, a problem
experts say the government is
now taking seriously.
One gauge of that is the free
rein given to a non-government
environmental group.
Fred de Sam Lazaro reports from
China as a part of his ongoing
series Agents for Change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The
inspectors came calling recently
at this massive textile factory
in
the eastern city of Hangzhou.
The plant is part of the
Saintyear company, one of the
icons of China's rapid rise as a
manufacturing powerhouse. It
produces two billion feet of
patterned and dyed fabric each
year for clothing makers and
retailers around the world.
This plant also produces some
60,000 tons of waste water, and
a 2013 investigation found
it wasn't being
adequately treated.
Manager Wang Wei said millions
of dollars were invested to
upgrade the system.
WANG WEI, Vice President,
Saintyear (through translator):
Today, we invited IPE in to show
them our changes, our
improvement in environmental
protection, so their inspectors
can see we
are in compliance with
government requirements.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: But IPE, the
inspectors, are not from the
all-powerful government.
The Institute of Public and
Environmental Affairs, is a
small non-government
organization.
IPE founder Ma Jun has won
international awards for his
environmental activism, with no
apparent
objection from the government.
He's used technology and
political savvy to take on
China's powerful
industrial establishment, says
Linda Greer of the
Washington-based NRDC, the
Natural
Resources Defense Council,
which has partnered with IPE.
LINDA GREER, Natural Resources
Defense Council: I think he's an
astute observer of what are
the problems and how can they
best be solved in China.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Ma was an
investigative journalist in the
1990s, when he began documenting
the toll of China's
industrialization, environmental
and human.
MA JUN, Founder, Institute of
Public and Environmental
Affairs: Like in those cancer
village, a group
of old ladies kneeling down in
front of me, you know, holding a
bottle of polluted water
and hoping that they would get
help, this is the voice that got
drowned in this complex
globalized supply chain system.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He says
hundreds of millions of Chinese
have been exposed to health
hazards.
In our interview, which occurred
right after he injured his lip
in a bicycling accident,
Ma said things are
approaching a tipping point.
MA JUN If we don't handle that
right, this will not just
threaten our social stability,
but it could hinder the very
economic growth itself.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It's not
hard to get a sense of public
concern, even anger.
WOMAN (through translator): The
air is not good, and it's
getting worse and worse.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: At the
sidewalk barbershop outside the
industrial city of Tianjin,
people
shared their feelings,
though not their names.
MAN (through translator): You do
feel the pollution when you
breathe. It's a lot more
polluted than before. The water
is also polluted and our food.
MAN (through translator): The
officials are corrupt. People
with money can buy favor.
Corrupt officials
are everywhere.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Ma says
there's growing political will
in Beijing to tackle the crisis.
Standards have been tightened
and factories are now required
to report their emission
levels in real time.
IPE then makes this information
user-friendly to the public
online and now on mobile.
This is a large power plant just
outside the industrial city of
Tianjin, and it's one of
thousands of industrial sites
across the country that are
monitored. And that information
is
readily available to anyone
who's downloaded the IPE app
onto their smartphone. As it
turns
out, this plant today is well
within the range of allowable
emissions.
As you can see, there are dozens
of plants being monitored. Some
of them are in the red
zone. And the one that we're
standing in front of comes in at
33.
But environmental concerns often
take a back seat to economic
growth. Local officials who
are supposed to enforce emission
levels are instead rewarded for
creating jobs.
LINDA GREER: There's sort of a
nobody will ever know mentality
down there at the provincial
and local level.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: So IPE has
taken matters to the global
level, to customers, far
likelier
to be sensitive about
their public image.
When IPE learned the Hangzhou
factory was out of compliance,
for example, it contacted
its biggest customers, including
Nike, Wal-Mart, Gap and H&M.
MA JUN: They made very clear
commitment to sustainable
manufacturing and sourcing. And
we just want to hold them
accountable for that.
WANG WEI (through translator):
IPE convinced our brand
customers Not to place any order
from any supplier who did not
meet their environmental
requirements. IPE is trusted by
the public,
and we can trust their data.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Because of
its size, Wang says his company
was able to afford the $30
million-plus upgrade. But he
says that may not be true of all
suppliers, who are often
pressured by their brand
customers to lower costs.
Ma Jun says the solution is to
make information accessible to
all parties.
MA JUN: Many stakeholders would
like to join the efforts,
including, including even the
polluters themselves. You know,
they pollute. It's not because
morally they have a problem,
but more because the mechanism
now is rewarding those who cut
corners to save cost. So I think
that we can level
the playing field.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: One way IPE
does that is by publishing an
annual transparency index.
MA JUN (through translator):
Today, I would like to announce
the top 100 brands and their
ranking and scores.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The index
ranks international brands on
how they have dealt with
suppliers
that are violating pollution
laws. Are they working to reduce
emissions or increase recycling,
for instance?
MA JUN (through translator):
Scores have been on the rise.
And the score for Apple has
exceeded
70 twice.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Apple ranks
number one, ironic, since the
company initially declined
to work with IPE. It relented
after IPE's investigations
linked several polluting
factories
to the Silicon Valley giant.
Today, Apple and several global
brands use the group's
data as a resource.
Here's retailer
Target's Ninh Trinh.
NINH TRINH, Target: We look at
IPE to ensure that there are no
irregularities. What is
the progress of our suppliers
that have irregularities that
need to be reported?
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Several,
like Macy's, J.C. Penney, and
Victoria's Secret, were rated
at zero. The brands insist they
monitor their suppliers. Macy's
and Penney told us they
never heard from IPE. The group
says each brand was contacted by
letter. Ma says IPE
will add brands on the next
version of its mobile app, not
just the factory names that
mean little to consumers,
especially in the West.
LINDA GREER: China's pollution
problem is caused by about
one-third by export to America
and to Western Europe. So this
pollution is our pollution, and
I think we have an ethical
obligation to help reduce it.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And even as
China begins cleaning up, she
and Ma Jun fear the global
supply chain will migrate to
less expensive countries, eager,
as China was a generation
ago, to attract new factories,
but lacking systems to safeguard
the environment.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam Lazaro in Tianjin,
China.
GWEN IFILL: Fred's report was
funded in part by the Pulitzer
Center on Crisis Reporting.
A version of this story also
appeared on the PBS show
"Religion & Ethics Newsweekly."
art
GWEN IFILL: Finally tonight, one
of North America's biggest
contemporary art fairs wrapped
in Miami this weekend.
Special correspondent Jared
Bowen was there to see how the
annual gathering is changing
the city's identity.
JARED BOWEN: For a week every
December, Miami becomes the
center of the contemporary art
world. Art Basel, now in its
14th year, is an international
gathering of more than 260
galleries, 4,000 artists, many
big-name dealers and collectors,
and an estimated 70,000 art
aficionados from
all walks of life.
NOAH HOROWITZ, Director, Art
Basel Americas: Fairs have
become a real central meeting
point
for a lot of those
different constituents.
JARED BOWEN: Noah Horowitz is
director of Art Basel Americas.
NOAH HOROWITZ: These are the
leading galleries anyway really.
And they're coming here to
show some of their best work.
So, collectors come really
because of the quality of the
galleries and the quality of
artists on view. You don't get
this anywhere. And for us, that
is what makes it so special.
JARED BOWEN: Think of all the
works you see in museums around
the world. They're here,
but for sale, from Picasso
masterpieces to a towering tree
by Chinese sensation Ai Weiwei.
There's supposedly $3 billion
worth of art on display this
year, and the show has spread
across Miami to some two dozens
satellite fairs showcasing works
by artists from around
the globe.
Chilean sculptor Ivan Navarro
says he has seen an enormous
shift for Latin American
artists in just the past decade.
IVAN NAVARRO, Artist: When I
started showing here in 2005, it
was just the beginning of
Latino-American art being
available to the wide market.
And now it's absolutely an art
that is recognized as important
as American art, as European
art. It's just part of the
universal art history.
JARED BOWEN: Navarro is
represented here by Maria Baro
and her gallery based in Sao
Paulo,
Brazil.
Why are you here?
MARIA BARO, Baro Gallery: I'm
here because I want to sell. I
do to do sold out.
JARED BOWEN: Frances Trombly is
a Miami native, this year
displaying work at a satellite
fair
called Pulse.
LEYDEN RODRIGUEZ-CASANOVA,
Dimensions Variable: What we try
to do every December is
concentrate
on the artists that
are working in Miami.
JARED BOWEN: She and her artist
husband, Leyden
Rodriguez-Casanova, are also
co-directors
of an independent gallery in
downtown Miami called Dimensions
Variable. They say they
have seen a sea change in
Miami's art scene since Art
Basel.
LEYDEN RODRIGUEZ-CASANOVA:
Because of the fair coming here,
because of this new awareness
of what is going on here,
there's a lot of people coming
to visit here, whether it's
curators, collectors, that are
kind of looking to Miami and
looking into what's happening
in the city. And the artists
that are working here are being
able to take advantage of those
possibilities.
JARED BOWEN: One of the most
visible signs of change since
Art Basel came to Miami is
the graffiti-clad neighborhood
of Wynwood, a warehouse district
once avoided by locals.
It's now a magnet for gallery,
studios and perhaps most of all
developers.
CRAIG ROBINS, Developer: I build
neighborhoods. And to give
neighborhoods a sense of place,
I feel that art, design,
architecture are all important
components that can make a
neighborhood
really feel special
and different.
JARED BOWEN: Collector,
philanthropist and developer
Craig Robins stands at the nexus
of art and commerce in Miami.
After helping redevelop South
Beach, in the '90s, Robins
started work on a desolate site
in Midtown, leveling abandoned
buildings to produce a
mix of high-end fashion and
furniture stores, all surrounded
by giant works of art and
renamed
the Design District.
He also helped bring
Art Basel to Miami.
CRAIG ROBINS: Miami has become a
city where we define ourselves
with culture. And you
see many different examples of
that. Art Basel was clearly a
catalyst. There are incredible
art collections in the city, and
there are lots of museums that
exist or are merging
on a new level.
JARED BOWEN: Two of those
museums are the Institute of
Contemporary Art set to open
in a new building in the Design
District in 2017, and the Perez
Art Museum Miami, which
moved into a brand-new $200
million building in 2013.
FRANKLIN SIRMANS, Perez Art
Museum Miami: October 15 was my
first day.
JARED BOWEN: Franklin Sirmans,
who only just recently arrived
from the Los Angeles County
Museum of Art, is the
Perez Museum's director.
FRANKLIN SIRMANS: In a city like
Miami, our past is short. If
you're going to the museum
of modern art, you have to work
through Picasso. There is no way
that you can deny that presence,
whereas, here, it's a
little bit shorter history.
JARED BOWEN: His task at the
Perez, take it from a place with
the base of community support
and a shiny new building and
find the money to turn it into a
world-class institution.
Another newcomer is Alexandre
Arrechea, a Cuban sculptor who
this week created a
participatory
piece at the Cisneros Fontanals
Art Foundation downtown.
ALEXANDRE ARRECHEA, Sculptor:
You have to remember places like
New York at some point
are very expensive to afford for
many artists, especially coming
from South America, and
Miami suddenly becomes a good
opportunity, a place that you
still can afford places for
studios and to create business.
There is obviously a big
competition here, but I think
there's
a lot of opportunities here.
JARED BOWEN: Opportunities, yes.
The fair brings in millions of
dollars each year to
the local economy.
But some complain that amid all
the hype of Art Basel, the vast
sums of money being spent,
all the VIP events, the focus is
too much on big-name outsiders
and not enough on the
local scene.
We run the space because we feel
like the city and the community
and the people here
have things to say, really
important things to say. And we
want to foster that.
LEYDEN RODRIGUEZ-CASANOVA: And
what ends up happening
sometimes, I think, with like
the
fairs is that you have got a
circuit of fairs, where people
travel the world. And they're
basically looking at the same
artist in every single city they
go to.
JARED BOWEN: Part of the
challenge is to translate the
energy and excitement Art Basel
generates
into the rest of the year here
in Miami and to define what it
means to be a great art
city in the 21st century.
From Miami, I'm Jared Bowen
for the "PBS NewsHour."
You can see more of Jared's
coverage of the arts, which he
does for our Boston station,
on their Web site, WGBH.org.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online: Nearly three million
Syrian children are out of
school,
displaced from their
homes and communities.
But one Syrian artist wants to
encourage young refugees to
return to the classroom, by
making
them cheerful places with
bright, colorful murals some of
the students even help paint.
You can find a photo gallery of
that work on our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tune in later tonight on
"Charlie Rose": George Osborne,
British chancellor of the
exchequer,
on the U.K.'s new role in
the fight against ISIS.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
here at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.